---
layout: post
title: W Y M I W Y G
date:   2007-09-28
categories: Misc
tags: 
    - Management
---

Eileen says I’m **auditory** (rather [than visual or
Kinaesthetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Learning_styles#Neil_Fleming's_VAK/VARK_model)
). Odd for someone who spends so much of his time on photographs … Does she say
that because words fascinate me and I think up acronyms ? I coined the word
**Legumetrics** – I just searched for it and no one else has ever used it. *Legumes*
are peas and beans. and *metrics* is the anything to do with measuring and
counting. Legumetrics is the science of bean counting; I wouldn’t call someone a
*bean-counter* but legumetricist says it in a way which the accused will not
understand.

Eileen being … [Visual on this
evidence](http://blogs.technet.com/eileen_brown/archive/2007/09/26/selling-early-copies-of-halo-3.aspx)
… wouldn’t have coined the term **wyMiwyg**.

You know of wySiwyg – what-you-see-is-what-you-get. Eileen and my previous boss,
Robin, have both talked a phenomenon which I call
**What-you-MEASURE-is-what-you-get**. It *can* be a good thing. As I type, I’m in
the exhausted-but-elated state that’s come from doing the road-show with Steve –
we had a complete revamp of how we present content because we listened to
feedback and the result has been fantastic. {Next week, when I’m less exhausted
I’ll post more background information for the stuff we covered on the roadshow.
Keep the feedback coming for next time and stuff you want me to post.}

But on the other hand, Eileen and I have talked more than once about **Manager X
who took action Y because they were given an objective of increasing/reducing
metric Z**. Manager X might be outside Microsoft, or inside either in some remote
division or rather closer to our part of the organization chart. **Action Y made
no sense, except to meet a target** – one seemingly created by someone who is
themselves measured on the number of metrics they create for measuring others.

Yesterday I read two posts of [Inspector Gadget](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Perverting-Course-Justice-Hilarious-Shocking/dp/1906308047) that shows that wyMiwyg is more
widespread than I realized. There has been plenty of discussion in political
circles about whether the “Target culture” means that schools do what their
masters assess, rather than what their teachers judge , whether hospitals treat
statistics with greater importance than they do patients. Gadget explains what
happens
[when-customer-feedback-goes-mad](http://web.archive.org/web/20101130171120/https:/inspectorgadget.wordpress.com/2007/09/21/hot-spots-and-foolishness/)
and explains target culture from a Police angle

>   The Senior Management Team will pad softly with their hands full of paper
>   and mugs of filter coffee towards the meeting room on the third floor… They
>   stop only to exchange knowing glances with the secretary and look at [how we
>   did over the
>   weekend](http://web.archive.org/web/20071014053002/http:/inspectorgadget.wordpress.com/2007/09/15/gadgets-policing-priorities-2008/)
>   on the cover of the local paper. Now they prepare to sit in judgement about
>   events far away concerning people of whom they know nothing. There is more
>   money in this room, more experience and more qualifications than have been
>   deployed in the whole Division over the last 72 hours….
>   
>   I will be dressed in body armour and street gear in case something happens
>   and I have to leave in a hurry. This mode of dress makes the others feel
>   uncomfortably numb.
>   
>   People keep their distance in case there is a risk to be taken or a decision
>   made. One which may effect people’s lives. Physical proximity might be
>   enough to suggest joint responsibility….
>   
>   ….The Orwellian phrases swirl around the room, Citizen Focus, Neighbourhood
>   Partnerships, Today’s Policing Today, Problem Orientated Local Solution
>   Based Initiatives. Phantom Battalions are moved around a non-existent
>   battlefield.

Bonus link. If you’re surprised that Policemen can write beyond the “I was
proceeding down the highway when I encountered the defendant” level, then [you
need to read this](http://whichendbites.blogspot.com/2007/09/90-minutes.html)
which Gadget linked to. I’ve never had that kind of a bond with an animal and it made me want
to cry.; if you have, then say something, OK ?

This post originally appeared [on my technet
blog](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/archive/blogs/jamesone/wymiwyg).
