---
layout: post
title:  "Just enough admin and constrained endpoints. Part 1 Understanding endpoints."
date:   2016-06-29
categories: PowerShell
tags:
    - Just Enough Admin
    - JEA
    - Devops
    - Constrained Endpoints
    - Remoting
---
Before we can dive into Just Enough Admin and _constrained_ end points, I think we need fill in some of the background on endpoints and where they fit in PowerShell remoting

When you use PowerShell remoting, the local computer sees a _session_, which is connected to an _endpoint_ on a remote computer. Originally, PowerShell installations did not enable inbound sessions but this has changed with newer versions. If the Windows Remote Management service (also known as WSMAN) is enabled, it will listen on port 5985; you can check with    
`NetStat -a | where {$_ -Match 5985}`    
If WSMAN is not listening you can use the `Enable-PSRemoting` cmdlet to enable it.

With PS remoting enabled you can try to connect. If you run
`$s = New-PSSession -ComputerName localhost`
from a Non-elevated PowerShell session, you will get an _access denied_ error but from an _elevated_ session it should run successfully. The reason for this is explained later. When then command is successful, $s will look something like this:    
`Id Name ComputerName State ConfigurationName Availability`    
`-- ---- ------------ ----- ----------------- ------------`    
`2 Session2 localhost Opened Microsoft.PowerShell Available`

We will see the importance of ConfigurationName later as well. The `Enter-PSSession` cmdlet switches the shell from talking to the local session to talking to a remote one; running    
`Enter-PSSession $s`    
will change the prompt to something like this    
`[localhost]: PS C:\Users\James\Documents>`    
showing where the remote session is connected: Exit-PSSession returns to the original (local) session; you can enter and exit the session at will, or create a temporary session on demand, by running    
`Enter-PsSession -ComputerName LocalHost`

The `Get-PsSession` cmdlet shows a list of sessions and will show that there is no session left open after exiting an “on-demand” session. As well as interacting with a session you can use Invoke-command to run commands in the session, for example    
`Invoke-Command -Session $s -ScriptBlock {Get-Process -id $pid}`     
`Handles NPM(K) PM(K) WS(K) VM(M) CPU(s)   Id SI ProcessName PSComputerName`    
`------- ------ ----- ----- ----- ------   -- -- ----------- --------------`    
`547     26 61116 77632 ...45   0.86 5788 0  wsmprovhost      localhost`

At first sight this looks like a normal process object, but it has an additional property, "PSComputerName". In fact, a remote process is represented as a different type of object. Commands in remote sessions might return objects which are not recognised on the local computer. So the object is _serialized_ – converted to a textual representation – sent between sessions, and _de-serialized_ back into a custom object. There are two important things to note about this:

1.  De-serialized objects don’t have Methods or Script Properties. Script properties often will need access to something on the originating machine – so PowerShell tries to convert them to _Note_ Properties. A method can only be invoked in the session where the object was created – not a session which was sent a copy of the object’s data.
2.  The object type changes. The `.getType()` method will return `PsObject`, and the `PSTypeNames` property says the object is a `Deserialized.System.Diagnostics.Process`; PowerShell uses PSTypenames to decide how to format an object and will use rules defined for type X to format a Deserialized.X object.    
However, testing the object type with `-is [x]` will return false, and a function which requires a parameter to be of type X will not accept a Deserialized.X. In practice this works as a safety-net, if you want a function to be able to accept remote objects you should detect that they are remote objects and direct commands to the correct machine.

`Invoke-Command` allows commands which don’t support a `-ComputerName` parameter (or equivalent) to be targeted at a different machine, and also allows commands which aren’t available on the local computer to be used remotely. PowerShell provides two additional commands to make the process of using remote modules easier. `Import-PSSession` creates a temporary module which contains proxies for all the cmdlets and functions in the remote session that don’t already exist locally, this means that instead of having to write:    
`Invoke-Command -Session $s -ScriptBlock {Get-ADUser}`   
the `Get-ADUser` command works much as it would with a locally installed Active Directory module. Using `Invoke-Command` will return a Deserialized AD user object and the local copy of PowerShell will fall back to default formatting rules to display it; but when the module is created it includes a format XML file describing how to format additional objects.
`Import-PSSession` adds commands to a single session using a temporary module: its partner `Export-PSSessio`n saves a module that can be imported as required – running commands from such a module sets up the remote session and gives the impression that the commands are running locally.

###  What about the configuration name and the need to logon as Admin?

WSMAN has multiple end points which sessions can connect to, the command `Get-PSSessionConfiguration` lists them – by default the commands which work with PS Sessions connect to the end point named `microsoft.powershell`, but the session can connect to other endpoints depending on the tasks to be carried out.
`Get-PSSessionConfiguration` shows that by default for the `microsoft.powershell` endpoint has StartUpScript and RunAsUser properties which are blank and a permission property of    
`NT AUTHORITY\INTERACTIVE        AccessAllowed,`    
`BUILTIN\Administrators          AccessAllowed,`    
`BUILTIN\Remote Management Users AccessAllowed`

This explains why we need to be an administrator (or in the group “Remote Management Users”) to connect. It is possible to modify the permissions with    
`Set-PSSessionConfiguration -Name "microsoft.powershell" -ShowSecurityDescriptorUI`

There is **one special case:** the switch `-EnableNetworkAccess` allows the _current session’s credentials_ to connect through to a session on the same machine.

When Start-up script and Run-As User are _not_ set, the session looks like any other PowerShell session and runs as the user who connected – you can see the user name by running `whoami` or checking the `$PSSenderInfo` automatic variable in the remote session.

Setting the Run-As User allows the session to run with more privileges than are granted to the connecting user: to prevent this user running amok, the end point is _Constrained_  – in simpler terms we put limits what can be done in that session. Typically, we don’t want the user to have access to every command available on the remote computer, and we may want to limit the parameters which can be used with those that _are_ allowed. The start-up script does the following to setup the constrained environment:

-  Loads modules
-  Defines proxy functions to wrap commands and modify their functionality
-  Hides cmdlets, aliases and functions from the user.
-  Defines which scripts and external executables may be run
-  Sets the PowerShell language mode, to further limit the commands which can be run in a session, and prevent new ones being defined.

If the endpoint is to work with Active Directory, for example, it might hide `Remove-ADGroupMember` (or import only selected commands from the AD module); it might use a proxy function for `Add-ADGroupMember` so that only certain groups can be manipulated. The DNS Server module might be present on the remote computer but the `Import-Module` cmdlet is hidden so there is no way to load it.

Hiding or restricting commands `doesn’t` stop people doing the things that their access rights allow. An administrator can use the default endpoint (or start a remote desktop session) and use the unconstrained set of tools. The goal is to give out fewer admin rights and give people **Just Enough Admin** to carry out a clearly defined set of tasks: so the endpoint has a _privileged account_ (even a full administrator account) but other, _less privileged accounts are allowed to connect_ run the constrained commands that it provides.    
`Register-PSSessionConfiguration` sets up a new endpoint can and `Set-PSSessionConfiguration` modifies an existing one ; the same parameters work with both -for example
{% highlight powershell %}
$cred = Get-Credential
Register-PSSessionConfiguration -Name "RemoteAdmin" `
                                -RunAsCredential $cred `
                                -ShowSecurityDescriptorUI  `
-StartupScript 'C:\Program Files\WindowsPowerShell\EndPoint.ps1'
{% endhighlight %}
The `-ShowSecurityDescriptorUI` switch pops up a permissions dialog box – to set permissions non-interactively it is possible to use `-SecurityDescriptorSddl` and specify the information using SDDL but writing SDDL is a skill in itself.

With the end point defined the next part is to create the endpoint script, and I’ll cover that in [part 2](/powershell/2016/07/01/Jea2.html)