---
layout: post
title:  "The Engineer Cometh."
date:   2020-10-29
categories: Misc
tags: 
    - Programming
    - Continuous Deployment
    - .NET
    - Visual Studio Code
    - PowerShell
---
I grew up with [Flanders and
Swann](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flanders_and_Swann) as part of the cultural
fabric, although their songs are somewhat older than I am. Thanks to them
some English people may:
-   Pronounce, Gnu, the alternative name of the Wildebeest, to rhyme with Canoe,
    although the g should be silent.
-   Know Mozart’s Horn Concerto is K495 but also *know the words*.
-   Grasp the second law of the Thermo-dynamics (Heat/Cannot of itself pass/From
    one body/To a hotter/Body).
-   Have an automatic choice of music for [If you own this car, you won't care
    if it gets muddy,](https://vimeo.com/326773915)

And one of their best known was **The Gasman cometh**.
<iframe width="641" height="481" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mOA_SUKEZRE" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Others like “A song of patriotic prejudice” poked fun at attitudes of the 1950s but might make us cringe today,
and their “gasman” would probably be a more multi-skilled and inclusive _engineer_. [Waiting for compilation, tests, and pipeline task to run](https://xkcd.com/303/), I produced this which I hope is an agreeable distraction.


\`Twas on a Monday Morning, I made a function call  
It errored with an overflow - no value back at all  
I fixed it in the source code, committed into "main"  
And I had to fix 10 other files to make them run again.  
Oh, it all makes work for a programmer to do.

\`Twas on the Tuesday morning the project wouldn't build  
It was working fine on Monday; I was not exactly thrilled.  
A morning of debugging found the root cause was a patch,  
That was only found on my machine, the versions didn't match!  
Oh, it all makes work for a programmer to do.

\`Twas on the Wednesday morning, the Test Suite failed to run,  
with a sea of error messages as soon as it begun.  
I put an extra Mock in, and fixed it in a trice,  
And broke seventeen dependencies, which wasn't very nice!  
Oh, it all makes work for a programmer to do.

\`Twas on the Thursday morning the pipelines got all coy  
Everything was ready, but nothing would deploy.  
I checked my files for differences, but found them all the same…  
…And then it all deployed again, so Azure got the blame!   
Oh, it all makes work for a programmer to do.

\`Twas on the Friday morning the client came around,  
She tried some sample inputs and said, "Look what I've found"  
"These numbers are erroneous! A thousand times too small!"  
So we changed the calculation in a pesky function call.

On Saturday and Sunday, we do no work at all,  
so it was on the Monday morning that I tried the function call.
