---
layout: post
title:  "The 'definitive' Terminating and Non-Terminating errors in PowerShell."
date:   2022-06-13
categories: PowerShell
---

In something else I’m working on, I started to write

> There are half a dozen kinds of exceptions in PowerShell, and they are usually called “terminating and non-terminating errors.”

That wasn't a proof-reading mistake!  
I've read a lot things which glide over the many "*ifs* , *buts*, and *excepts*",
needed to explain why a PowerShell command might run after one error, but not another, or why
some attempts to control messages don't work as expected. Or why *this* is a terminating error,
and *that* is also a terminating error but they act differently. Or even what "terminating" means
technically and practically in PowerShell, or the role of *error handling* is.  
These aren't just in random writings on the net either - the examples in this post show a
couple of things don't do what PowerShell's help says they should... Usage of "error" and "exception" has
grown to treating the two as synonyms, and I'm not going try to undo *that*, although I have some sympathy
for people who will read something and say  "That's not an *error*, it's an *exception!*" or vice versa.
  
In this post I've set out to collect and illustrate the different situations - setting myself up as the
one totally complete, 100% accurate source would mean  I'm bound to miss something crucial - hence
the quotes around 'definitive' in the title. But the piece has become a bit of an epic.

### 1 Abnormal end – “abend” or [Goodnight Vienna](https://www.phrases.org.uk/meanings/goodnight-vienna.html) from an external program

Some systems use "Abend" ("evening" if you speak German) for a system crash. I remember
Novell NetWare used it instead of "panic" or "blue screen of death". In other places,
it's used (as here) for *any* "didn't run to successful completion".  
The following two lines give the same result in a PowerShell Script, a Unix shell script,
or a steam-driven batch file:

```
    ping -z localhost  
    ping -z www.github.com

```

When the first `ping` runs it sees `-z` as an invalid switch, prints a message, sets an
*exit-code* to say things ended badly and quits.  
Control returns to the script that called it, which runs the next command: the
first `ping` has no way to prevent it.  
Whatever calls `ping` *can* check the exit-code (sometimes called `ErrorLevel`) before
continuing, but most scripts leave most things *unchecked*.  
Generally, zero on exit indicates success, but non-zero values may
be informational rather than indicating a failure. On Linux, `ping` writes
to *standard error* to say "-z" is not valid, but on Windows `ping` writes the error message
to *standard output* (other commands, like `nslookup` write to *standard error* on
both OSes). PowerShell provides two automatic variables, `$LASTEXITCODE` to get
the exit-code of the last external program or script, and the Boolean `$?` to 
answer "was the last command error-free?"; but if the
external command is wrapped in `try / catch` the `catch` will **not** be triggered
by `$?` holding `false` or by messages going to *standard error*.

For the rest of the post the focus is *within* PowerShell; I mentioned `try / catch`, which
**treats the whole try block as one**, the `catch` block can't return execution to the next step, the older (but now little used) `trap` statement *can* do that.

### 2 Just a warning

When something is not processed as expected, but the command can still get
to the desired conclusion, that is the place for PowerShell to send a *warning*. Again this
isn’t (normally) caught by `try / catch`: it is just a message sent to a
specific output stream.

### 3 Like a warning, but worse

If you run `Get-Item "NonExistentName"`, the cmdlet reports that it can’t
process the item, which *could*, almost, be a warning, but it doesn't pass
the test of *getting to the right conclusion*, so it is classified as an *error*.
(Attempting to delete a non-existent item would be a more arguable case,
but the boundaries between *informational*, *warning*, and *error* can be fuzzy).  
`Get-Item` reports the error by writing an object to the *error* stream
(where **2** used the *warning* stream), but that doesn't mean that it *must* exit.

`Get-Item "NonExistentName", "."` will produce an error *and then*
get the current directory; if this is in the middle of a pipeline,
the rest of the pipeline will run normally. So this:
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    "NonExistent", "." | Get-Item | % -Process {$_.name} -End {"Finish"}
    
{% endhighlight %}

will output the error message for the first item, then the name of the second item, and finally run the `end` block and output "Finish".

As with the external program, `$?` indicates "error free". This pipeline completed with errors so `$?` is `false`, but 
because it is an internal command there is no exit code and `$LASTEXITCODE` is unchanged.

Internally, `Get-Item` calls the equivalent of `$PSCmdlet.WriteError()` and passes it an
*exception object* which contains the message, information to classify the error,
and contextual information about where it occurred.
PowerShell's `Write-Error` cmdlet acts a wrapper for that method, and can build the
object, given just the message text. When objects arrive in the error stream, PowerShell
adds them to the `$error` automatic variable and applies appropriate formatting
to display them ("appropriate" varies - PowerShell 7 has a concise view which Windows PowerShell 5 doesn't).  
Like the previous examples, by default `try / catch` doesn't see anything to do
when an object is written to the error stream: the two following examples
will print the original error without running their `catch` block:
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    try {Write-Error "Oh dear" } catch {"Caught"}
    
    try {Get-Item "NonExistent"} catch {"Caught"}
    
{% endhighlight %}

Parameters and preference variables can tell PowerShell to adopt
non-default behaviours when things are written to the `error`, `warning`, `debug` and `verbose` streams.
Changing `$ErrorActionPreference` would change the behaviour of the two lines above.  
The rest of this post concentrates on the `-ErrorAction` parameter and its associated preference variable, but `-WarningAction`
would have the same effect in many places.

### 4 "I can’t go on", "That's just you - I can"

The `WriteError()` method discussed in the previous section is available to PowerShell
cmdlets (including advanced functions), but some *internal* errors in PowerShell don't
come from *commands*. For example. `2/0` will say that you can't divide by zero,
or `[regex]::new("(")` will report that an unclosed bracket won’t parse.
These are operations which can’t continue - *terminating* errors and `try / catch` is
there to handle them. This contrasts with messages sent with `Write-Error()` which
are *non-terminating* by default and ignored by `try / catch`.

*Outside of scripting languages*, something reporting "I needed to terminate" means
whatever called it must terminate in the same way **unless** it can handle
the error; whatever called *that* must handle or terminate and so on.  
But the very first example in this post showed that scripting languages *don't* stop when
there is an error in an *external* command, and the default approach to *all* errors
is the same. Like the first example, the following lines would illustrate the point in
a Unix shell script, a Windows (or DOS!) batch file or PowerShell Script.
```
    eco "Hello!"
    echo " 'eco' was a typing error."
    
```
All three will say "there is no such command as `eco`" and then run the `echo` command.
    
Hopefully, some code will clarify what happens in different situations; 
I'll start with 4 functions named *one, two, three* and *four*.  
Function *four* runs a pipeline: `one | two | three` and will do
so in slightly different ways for different examples.  
Function *one* puts some data into the pipeline, *two* processes it
and demonstrates different types of errors, *three* receives the output
from *two* and all 4 functions print progress information. Depending on
what happens in function *two*, and on how *four* runs the pipeline we
may see *pipeline* code run in *one*, *two* and *three* (or not), and
we may see *post-pipeline* code run in *four* (or not).  
I recommend copying and pasting the code into a PowerShell session to do additional experiments.
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function one {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "one begins"}   end {Write-host "one ends"}
        process {1,2,3}
    }
    function two {param ([parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p)
        begin {Write-Host "two begins"}   end {Write-host "two ends"}
        process {
            if ($p -eq 2) {$p / 0 } # cause a division by zero error
            $p
        }
    }
    function three {param ([parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p)
        begin {Write-Host "three begins"} end {Write-host "three ends"}
        process {
            Write-host "three Processed $p"
            $p
        }
    }
    function four {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "four begins"}  end {Write-host "four ends"}
        process {
            $result = one | two | three
            Write-host "And the result is "
            $result
        }
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

**Note:** To make the code visible without scrolling, some lines have been combined in a
way they wouldn't be in typical code and I've omitted `[cmdletbinding()]` in *two* and
*three* where `[param()]` attributes mean it is assumed - that way it all fits on one screen.

Here is the result of running *four* with the first version of the functions:  
``` 
    ps> four
 
    four begins
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
        RuntimeException:
        Line |
           4 |      if ($p -eq 2) {$p / 0 }  # cause a division by zero error
             |                     ~~~~~~
             | Attempted to divide by zero.
    three Processed 2
    three Processed 3
    one ends
    two ends
    three ends
    And the result is
    1
    2
    3
    four ends

```

The `begin` blocks run, the value 1 is is processed, then the error occurs.
The message is displayed, and the very next command - function *two* outputting
2 - runs as if no error had happened; the pipeline and the function
which called it both continue normally, with *three* and *four* receiving 2 and
any subsequent value(s). All the `end` blocks run to complete the process.
Later I'll refer back to this "write message and carry on" behaviour as *“a”*.

This behaviour *might look like* a non-terminating error, but in fact PowerShell is
printing the message from a terminating error and **treating it as handled**. The
error *can* be handled with `try / catch` and the first variation is to change
function *four* to show that.

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function four {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "four begins"}  end {Write-host "four ends"}
        process {   # Add try {} Catch {}
                try { $result = one | two | three} catch {Write-Host "Error in the pipeline"}
                Write-host "And the result is "
                $result
        }
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

Now the result of running *four* is quite different:

```
    ps> four

    four begins
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    Error in the pipeline
    And the result is 
    four ends

```

Catching the error meant that the message "Error in the pipeline" was printed.
I said above that  "the whole `try` block runs as one", so we shouldn't expect
the pipeline to resume, and it doesn't.  
The statement in the `try` block said *assign the pipeline result(s) to a variable*,
so, although function *three* processed the first value, nothing will go into
`$Result` until the pipeline has completed. Non-completion means that no assignment
happens and function *four* has no values to output. Running

```
    ps> try {  one | two | three} catch {Write-Host "Error in the pipeline"}  
    
```

doesn't queue the output to go into a variable so it *is* displayed.  
Function *four* continues normally after handling the error, but
the pipeline terminated, so the functions in the pipeline do not run their `end` blocks.

I'll label ths behaviour *“b”* - the calling function did not stop but the pipeline did.

### Try *really* tries

The example above shows that try catches a terminating error in something which it calls - and this can be be multiple calls deep

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function five {param ($p) two  $P}
    function six  {param ($p) five $P}
    try {six 2} catch {"error happened"}
    
{% endhighlight %}

```
    two begins
    error happened

```

So the `try` block calls `six`, `six` calls `five`, `five` calls `two`, an error occurs in `two` and it *is* caught.

### Changing the error action

If the pipeline command is run with `-ErrorAction Stop` (or `ErrorActionPreference` has been set
to `stop` in any other way), that *can* also produce behaviour *“b”*, abandoning the pipeline,
and continuing from the next line in the function that called it. But we will see different
results of `-ErrorAction Stop` later.

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function four {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "four begins"}  end {Write-host "four ends"}
        process { #remove try {} / catch and use -ErrorAction Stop
                Write-Host "Error action preference in four is $errorActionPreference"
                $result = one | two -ErrorAction Stop | three  
                Write-host "And the result is "
                $result
        }
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

The inclusion of the error message is the only change to see between the version above
setting `error action` and the version     before it using `try / catch`. The division-by-zero error
itself can't change, PowerShell is **changing the way it is handled** inside function *two*. 
We can see the effect with the updated version of *four*:

```
    ps> four

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is Continue
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    two: 
    Line |
       5 |                  $result = one | two -ErrorAction Stop | three
         |                                  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
         | Attempted to divide by zero.
    And the result is
    four ends

```

The error is now shown as "the call to function *two* returned a divide-by-zero error".
When *two* continued it was shown as "there was a divide-by-zero error at *this line*."

Function `four` prints the message, considers it *handled*, and continues because that is what
the local *error action preference* set as the default for terminating errors - it imposed a
different terminating-error behaviour (`stop`) on *two*  
Running *four* with `-ErrorAction SilentlyContinue` changes what it does when *two* sends back an error:

```
    ps> four -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is SilentlyContinue
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    And the result is
    four ends

```

The pipeline end blocks did not run, nor did 2 or 3 get processed by function *three*, so
we can see that **`Stop` still applied** to *two* in the pipeline but when the error came
back to *four*, it was **handled silently** and execution continued.  
And if we run `four -errorAction Stop`, *four* doesn't run its final steps, like this:

```
    ps> four -ErrorAction Stop`

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is Stop
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    two:
    Line |
       5 |                  $result = one | two -ErrorAction Stop | three
         |                                  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
         | Attempted to divide by zero.
    
```

This is a new behaviour, which I'll call *“c”* - it stopped the pipeline, *and it
stopped the calling function*, because, that's what the error action in the
calling function said it should do for a terminating error.

### Catch me if you can...

In **2** we saw that `Get-Item` can continue after an *Item Not Found*
error, it just writes something to the error channel.
But in other cases cmdlets **must** terminate in the same way that a mathematical
operation must after a divide-by-zero.  
I'm working with the preview of PowerShell 7.3 where `Start-Sleep` can be given
a `[TimeSpan]` to wait; but a time-span can be *years* and the wait-time
in milliseconds is a signed 32-bit integer setting a limit of about 25 days.
[The source code on github](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/blob/master/src/Microsoft.PowerShell.Commands.Utility/commands/utility/StartSleepCommand.cs)
shows (at line 126 in the version I'm looking at) that `Start-Sleep` calls
`ThrowTerminatingError()` which we see'll in (**4**). This gives three different things to
test in `try / catch`

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    try {2/0}                                      catch {"Bad calculation"}
    try {Start-Sleep ([timespan]::FromDays(30)) }  catch {"Bad timespan"}    # not in 7.2.x or earlier
    try {Get-Item "Nonexistent" }                  catch {"Bad item"}
    
{% endhighlight %}

The code above gives the following:

```
    Bad calculation    
    Bad timespan
    Get-Item: Cannot find path ...

``` 
The *item not found* error  from `Get-Item` is is just a *non-terminating* message
to the error channel (by default) so it is **non-catchable**. So,
if `Get-Item` is in the `try` block, or in something that is called from `try` block,
(like function *two* in these examples) the `catch` won't run.
But the behaviour can be changed, like this:
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    try {Get-Item "Nonexistent" -ErrorAction Stop} catch {"Bad item"}
{% endhighlight %}

```
    Bad item

```

The call made by `Get-Item` to say the error occurred *doesn't* change, but that
call *acts differently* when `Error Action` is set to `Stop` (either using a
parameter, or by setting `$ErrorActionPreference`). You might think it makes the
*item not found* error act like a over-long TimeSpan or dividing by zero - but 
terminating errors can have have different behaviours...

The next example changes function *four* back to its original form. Originally,
function *two* continued at the line after the divide-by-zero, and the pipeline
completed all its stages if error action was `continue`. Swapping the divide-by-zero to the bad `Start-Sleep`
command gives the same result.  
The next example modifies function *two* to use `Get-Item -ErrorAction Stop` instead (the
effect on `Get-Item` would be the same if  `$ErrorActionPreference` were set to `Stop`
or the pipeline contained  `two -ErrorAction Stop`).

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function two {param ([parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p )
        begin {Write-Host "two begins"}   end {Write-host "two ends"}
        process { # change the cause of the error
            if ($p -eq 2) {Get-Item "NonExistent" -ErrorAction Stop}
            $p
        }
    }
    function four {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "four begins"}  end {Write-host "four ends"}
        process { # back to no error action or try/catch
            Write-host "Error action preference in four is $ErrorActionPreference"
            $result = one | two | three
            Write-host "And the result is "
            $result
        }
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

Running *four* with this version shows the effect of `-ErrorAction stop` on writing
what would otherwise be a non-terminating error:

```
    ps> four

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is Continue
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    Get-Item: 
    Line |
       4 |              if ($P -eq 2) {Get-Item "NonExistent" -ErrorAction Stop}
         |                             ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
         | Cannot find path ....
    
```

This is behaviour *“c”* again: stopping both the pipeline and the calling
function. But there is a **key difference** here. The error action preference says
that four should *continue* on a terminating error, yet it **stops**. I said above that
changing error action didn't make a non-terminating *item not found* error act
like dividing by zero. If it did, then the default error action preference
of `continue` would mean that this  
`Get-Item "NonExistent" -ErrorAction Stop; Write-host "boo"`  
would change Get-item's error to a terminating one which would then be treated
as *handled* by printing it, meaning execution would continue into `Write-Host`. In
other words `-Stop` wouldn't change the outward behaviour.  
So things don't work that way: to ensure that `Stop` means STOP, when a `WriteError()` converts
the error type because of the Error Action Preference, the resulting error *ignores Error Action Preference values*.
If we run this version of *four* with `-ErrorAction SilentlyContinue / Continue / Ignore` they have no effect.

I said above that it doesn't matter *where* `Error Action` is set to `Stop`. Changing *four* back to its
configuration before the last change - where running `two -ErrorAction Stop` gave behaviour *"b"* with
a terminating error caused by divide-by-zero - will yield behaviour *"c"* with an error from `Get-Item` that is
upgraded to a stopping one. The following code produces the same output as the code above.
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function two {param ([parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p )
        begin {Write-Host "two begins"}   end {Write-host "two ends"}
        process { # remove -ErrorAction stop 
            if ($p -eq 2) {Get-Item "NonExistent"}
            $p
        }
    }
    function four {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "four begins"}  end {Write-host "four ends"}
        process { #  use -ErrorAction Stop
                Write-host "Error action preference in four is $ErrorActionPreference"
                $result = one | two -ErrorAction Stop | three  
                Write-host "And the result is "
                $result
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

### 5 Stop the pipeline, C\# style - *pipeline* terminating errors

The functions  *one* *two* and *three* interact in the pipeline:
function *one* does some work, then functions *two* and *three*,
before *one* does some more. This means PowerShell needs a mechanism for a fatal error in part
of the pipeline to halt other cmdlets or functions, because simply writing an error and returning
from *two* won't stop *one* sending further data.

I referred earlier to compiled cmdlets calling `ThrowTerminatingError()`, which
stops the cmdlet and any pipeline it is part of. In advanced
functions, `$PSCmdlet` gives access to `ThrowTerminatingError()`, the next two
examples show it stopping just the function it is in, and stopping a pipeline:
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function seven {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "seven begins"}  end {Write-host "seven ends"}
        process { # create an error record, which contains an exception, then throw it.
            $ex = [System.Exception]::new("This is not the result you are looking for")
            $er = [System.Management.Automation.ErrorRecord]::new(
                $ex, "42", [System.Management.Automation.ErrorCategory]::OperationStopped, $null) 
            $PSCmdlet.ThrowTerminatingError($er)
        }
    }
    function four {[cmdletbinding()]param()
        begin {Write-Host "four begins"}  end {Write-host "four ends"}
        process { # back to no error action or try/catch
            Write-host "Error action preference in four is $ErrorActionPreference"
            $result = one | two | three
            Write-host "And the result is "
            $result
        }
    }
    function two { param ([parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p )
        begin {Write-Host "two begins"}   end {Write-host "two ends"}
        process {
            if ($P -eq 2) {seven}
            $p
        }
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

The code above defines a new function named *seven* which is called
in function *two* - *two* is called from the original version of *four*.  
When `$PSCmdlet.ThrowTerminatingError()` is called, only *seven* is affected -
everything runs *except for* `seven's` end block, as seen below:
```
    ps> four

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is Continue
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    seven begins
    seven: 
    Line |
       4 |              if ($P -eq 2) {seven}
         |                             ~~~~
         | This is not the result you are looking for
    three Processed 2
    three Processed 3
    one ends
    two ends
    three ends
    And the result is 
    1
    2
    3
    four ends

```

This is behaviour *“a”* (everything runs). Inside function *two* the error
"This is not the result you are looking for" could be handled with `try / catch`
or `trap` but, as in the divide-by-zero case, printing the messages is
deemed to be sufficient handling when these aren't used and error action preference is `continue`.

Modifying function *two* to contain `ThrowTerminatingError()` - instead of calling something which
contains it - usually results in pipeline ending behaviour *“b”*:
{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function two { param( [parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p )
        begin {Write-Host "two begins"}   end {Write-host "two ends"}
        process {
            if ($p -eq 2) {
                $ex = [System.Exception]::new("A different error")
                $er = [System.Management.Automation.ErrorRecord]::new($ex, "42",
                    [System.Management.Automation.ErrorCategory]::OperationStopped, $null)
                $PSCmdlet.ThrowTerminatingError($er)
                }
                $p
            }
        }
    
{% endhighlight %}

The pipeline terminates, and again a `try/catch` or `trap` would handle the error, and as before, printing the message is deemed to be sufficient handling, so *four* isn't stopped.

```
    ps> four

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is Continue
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    two: 
    Line |
       5 |              $result = one | two | three
         |                              ~~~
         | A different error
    And the result is
    four ends
    
```

The examples so far have shown that if anything except `Stop` changing the behaviour
of `WriteError()` leads to a terminating error, then when that error is received, if
there is no `try / catch` or `trap` to handle it, the behaviour is determined by
local value of error action and  default setting of `continue` makes
the printing of the error message sufficient "handling".  
But there is one major case we haven't reached yet and I hope you are asking  
**Isn't PowerShell's `throw` statement the same as the `ThrowTerminatingError()` method?**

### 6 Throwing spanners in the works

The answer to the previous question is that the terminating errors thrown in the two ways
are different. The `throw` *statement* doesn't *need* any
arguments, but it can take an `[ErrorRecord]` object or take a string
and convert it into an error record - the next example replaces the
method in the previous one with the `throw` statement and sends an error record:

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function two { param( [parameter(ValueFromPipeline)]$p )
        begin {Write-Host "two begins"}   end {Write-host "two ends"}
        process {
            if ($p -eq 2) {
                $ex = [System.Exception]::new("A different error")
                $er = [System.Management.Automation.ErrorRecord]::new($ex, "42",
                    [System.Management.Automation.ErrorCategory]::OperationStopped, $null)
                throw $er
            }
            $p
        }
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

Before this change, the *method* stopped the pipeline but not its
caller (a.k.a *behaviour “b”*) because printing the error was sufficient handling in function *four*.
But now that the `throw` *statement* is used in something called from
function *four*, the behaviour changes to *“c”* - stopping both pipeline
and caller - printing the message is not enough.
```
    ps> four

    four begins
    Error action preference in four is Continue
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    OperationStopped:
    Line |
       8 |                  throw $er
         |                  ~~~~~~~~~
         | A different error

```

A bit like upgrading `WriteError()`, if `throw` just sent a standard terminating error, the
default error action preference of `continue` would mean the error was considered
to be *handled* by printing the message, so `throw` wouldn't stop anything.
Instead, errors from the `throw` statement treat `Continue` as `stop`. By default, the
block containing the statement stops, passing the error to its caller, if the error is
not handled there that block stops, passing the error... and so on until either the error
is handled or the whole stack is unwound, which is what happened in the example above. But
passing the error up can mean it is processed with a different error action preference.
We can see this by re-using function *five* from earlier

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function five {[cmdletbinding()] param ($p) 
        Write-host "Error action preference in five is $ErrorActionPreference"
        Two  $P -ErrorAction continue ; 
        "Five done"
    }
    
{% endhighlight %}

``` 
    ps> five 2
    
    Error action preference in five is Continue
    two begins
    OperationStopped:
    Line |
       8 |                  throw $er
         |                  ~~~~~~~~~
         | A different error


    ps> five 2 -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue
    
    Error action preference in five is SilentlyContinue
    two begins
    Five done
        
```

In the first of the two examples above *five* stopped because there was an unhandled 
error from `throw`, that error has a special handling of `continue` = `stop` so 
we get *behaviour "c"*.  
In the second example, error action preference in *two* and *five* where different, so *two* stopped but
when the error was handed up to *five* `silentlyContinue` took effect and *five* finished  - behaviour *b*.  
So: errors from the `throw` statement have special behaviour, but it only applies to `continue` where
`WriteError()` switching to a terminating error also affected `SilentlyContinue` and `Ignore`

You might wonder why I set the error action explicitly when calling *two* from *five* in those two examples. There are three places to set the Error action.
```
    function five {[cmdletbinding()] param ($P)  two $P -ErrorAction continue ; "Five Done"} 
    five  
or
    function five {[cmdletbinding()] param ($P)  two $P; "Five Done"}
    Five -ErrorAction stop
or
    function five { [cmdletBinding{}] param($P)  two $p "Five Done"}
    $ErrorActionPreference = "Stop"
    $five

``` 
In the second and third *two* inherits the Error Action Preference set in five - which can have side 
effects and  `-ErrorAction` can cause other unexpected results.  
`Get-Item "NonExistent","." -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue`  
Outputs the items it *can* get, and the messages written to the error channel are silenced.  
But `ThrowTerminatingError()` *doesn't* write messages to the error channel in the same way, and so  
`seven -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue`  
*still* outputs the error message.  
This can be frustrating, I remember complaining that *“Active directory cmdlets don't respect error action”*. On
closer inspection, the commands are terminating when it is impossible for them to
continue, and *that* style of termination can be handled with `try / catch` even
if the catch block is empty to have the same effect as `SilentlyContinue`.
Functions which upgrade `WriteError()` also need `try / catch`

The `-ErrorAction` parameter does not affect function *seven*, because it doesn't receive terminating errors from anything it calls,
and it doesn't call `WriteError()` - but it *does* affect whatever calls *seven*. Setting the global preference
`$ErrorActionPreference = "SilentlyContinue"` has no effect on *seven's* call to `$PSCmdlet.ThrowTerminatingError()`
which still exits the function sending an error back, but **whatever receives that error** continues silently.

When the pipeline was told to run  
`one | two -ErrorAction Stop | three`  
the `ErrorAction` parameter set the value `$ErrorActionPreference` inside *two* to jointly say two things:
"In *your* scope the action for unhandled terminating errors (like divide-by-zero) is
`stop` and if anything called from you writes an error
message, make a terminating error which ignores `Continue` / `SilentlyContinue` and `Ignore`.  
On one occasion above, function *two* was told this with divide-by-zero - giving behaviour *"b"* when
the 'normal' terminating error was processed under a preference of `continue`. On another occasion it was
told this with `Get-Item` writing an error - resulting in behaviour *"c"* with the 'special' terminating error.

This brings us back to `WriteError()` combined with `Stop` producing errors which can't be
silenced, where errors from the `throw` statement can be. Some people see this as a design
flaw, but fixing it would create problems for existing scripts.  
The last version of *two* uses the `throw` statement, and error action (even when inherited)
can change what `throw` does. If the author of *two* assumes that use of `throw` means the
function will *always* send back an error, the result of the next command might be a surprise.
```
    ps> $x = one | two -ErrorAction SilentlyContinue | three`  
 
    one begins
    two begins
    three begins
    three Processed 1
    three Processed 2
    three Processed 3
    one ends
    two ends
    three ends
    
```

Setting `SilentlyContinue` means the `throw` statement has no effect - if
`throw` is there to prevent execution continuing
into something which might be harmful, it is a good idea to
use `throw... ; return` so if the command is told to silently continue,
execution still goes back to whatever called it.

In the same way, code which assumes that it wil be able to run something after an error
has occurred may not clean up properly if it is run with `-ErrorAction Stop`.

### 7 Break - which breaks stuff, and exit

For completeness the `break` statement is designed for flow control statements where
it means "stop processing this item, and don't process any further
items". And the PowerShell help has a warning not to use it elsewhere because:
> PowerShell looks *up the call stack* for an enclosing construct. If it can't find \[one\] the current runspace is quietly terminated. \[meaning functions and scripts \] can inadvertently terminate their *callers*.

The `throw` statement terminates callers by default, but provides a message to say why
and can it be handled with `try / catch` or `trap` or some values of `$ErrorActionPreference`. 
By contrast `break` doesn't explain itself - and is either inside a construct which handles it or stops *everything*.  
To see this we can create a function which contains a `break` statement and use it with the `foreach` *statement* -which handles break,
and the `ForEach-Object` *cmdlet* - which doesn't.

{% highlight PowerShell %}
    function eight {param ($p) $p ; break }  

    foreach ($x in @(1..3)) { foreach ($y in @('a','b')) { eight "$x $y"  }} ; "Finished"

     1..3 | ForEach-Object -Process { "$_ a","$_ b" | ForEach-Object { eight $_ } } -End {"Ending"} ; "Finished"
    
{% endhighlight %}

The version using the `foreach` *statement* outputs
```
    1 a
    2 a
    3 a
    Finished

```
So the `break` in the inner loop causes it to exit after processing the value for "a" but
the outer loop continues with item 2 and 3, and "Finished" is printed.

The second version with the cmdlet self-destructs when it it reaches `break` and only outputs `1 a`.  
If *eight* is a private function which will only be used in a `foreach` or similar statement this design
might be useful, but if *eight* is available *anywhere* using `break` is reckless.

`Exit` is the only PowerShell statement I can think of which behaves differently in a script
file to a function. (Spoiling my usual description that a script is a script block in a file,
and a function is a script block in special-purpose variable.)

I've written about `exit` (and `break`) [before](https://jhoneill.github.io/powershell/2019/08/21/ExitThrowReturnEtc.html). The `exit` statement
takes an optional value for the exit code, which defaults to zero, and can be a negative number
on Windows, but must be positive on Linux. If a *script* ends with `exit 123` then running the script
from within PowerShell will leave the 123 in `$LastExitCode`. If PowerShell is run with `-File script.ps1`,
it exits with an exit code of 123. But if it is run with `-Command script.ps1` or `-command "& 'path with spaces.ps1'"`
then it runs the script, has nothing else to run and exits with an error code of 0 indicating "all commands ran".

`Exit 123` at the PowerShell prompt closes that instance of PowerShell returning an exit code of 123, as does `Exit 123` in
a *function* - so in a function it is "close PowerShell", in a script it is "return with an exit code". And that's where this post started,
so time for me to exit.

### Finally {}

A summary 

- We have errors - which divide into non-terminating and terminating - warnings and exits.
- Non-terminating errors can printed, silenced, drop into the debugger or ask the user what to do next;
they can also be upgraded to terminating errors but without doing that, they cannot be trapped or caught.  
- Terminating errors can be handled with `trap` or `try / catch` or  treated as "handled" just by
printing them, handled silently,  drop into the debugger or ask the user what to do next, or simply stop.
- Some terminating errors disallow some options - in particular those from upgraded *non-*terminating errors and those generated by the `throw` statement.
- The preference variable `$ErrorActionPreference` sets the behaviour for both terminating and non terminating errors, and the `-ErrorAction` common parameter sets it for a single cmdlet/ Advanced-function
- Problems arise when functions assume they will only be run with `$ErrorActionPreference` set to particular values, or assume that they will only see errors which have been generated in particular ways.
